Create 2020-12-17-solidity-v0.8.0-release-announcement.md (#118)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2020-12-16-solidity-v0.8.0-release-announcement.md

This release does not include many features but rather changes that require a
backwards-incompatible adjustment in syntax or semantics. For a detailed explanation,
please see the [documentation](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/080-breaking-changes.html).

The change that will affect most users is that arithmetic operations are now checked by default,
which means that overflow and underflow will cause a revert. This feature can be disabled locally by using an ``unchecked`` block.

The second change that is very visible is that the ABI coder v2 is activated by default. You can
activate the old coder using ``pragma abicoder v1``, or explicitly select v2 using ``pragma abicoder v2``.
ABI coder v2 is more complex but also performs more checks on the input and supports more types.

Furthermore, internal errors like division by zero, assertion failure and others
do not use the invalid opcode anymore, but use ``revert`` with a special error message,
in order to not waste gas in such situations.

Another important change is that we restricted the possibilities of explicit conversions
to avoid ambiguities. All conversions that were possible before are still possible, but

> you might have to perform two conversions to get there - which does not affect the generated code, though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you might have to perform two conversions to get there - which does not affect the generated code, when the optimizer is enabled.
```

> These are only some of the more important breaking changes in 0.8.0, please read the changelog below for the full list!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are only some of the important breaking changes in 0.8.0, please read the changelog below for the full list!
```

### Checked Arithmetic

The "Checked Arithmetic" feature of Solidity 0.8.x consists of three sub-features:
- Revert on assertion failures and similar conditions instead of using the invalid opcode.

> - Actual checked arithmetic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Checked arithmetic, i.e., revert on overflows, underflows etc.
```

implementing cryptographic routines, we provide a way to disable the checked arithmetic and
re-enable the previous "wrapping" or "modulo" arithmetic:

Any block of the form ``unchecked { ... }`` uses wrapping arithmetic. You can use
this special block as a regular statement inside another block:

```solidity
contract C {
    function f() public pure returns (uint) {
        uint x = 0;
        unchecked { x--; }
        return x;
    }
}
```

An unchecked block can of course contain any number or any kind of statement
and will create its own variable scope.
If there is a function call inside the unchecked block, the function will
not inherit the setting - you have to use another ``unchecked`` block inside the function
if you also want it to use wrapping arithmetic.

We decided for some restrictions for the ``unchecked`` block:

1. In modifiers you cannot use ``_;`` inside it, because this might lead to confusion about whether the property is inherited.

2. You can only use it inside a block but not as a replacement for a block. The following code snippets, for example, are both invalid:

    ```solidity
    function f() unchecked { uint x = 7; }
    ```

>     ```solidity
>     function f() pure {
>         uint x;
>         for (uint i = 0; i < 100; i++) unchecked { x += i; }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```solidity
    function f() pure {
        uint x;
        for (uint i = 0; i < 100; i++) unchecked { x += i; }
    }
```
Added a missing brace

    ```

You have to wrap the unchecked blocks in another block to make it work.

### Explicit Conversions

Explicit conversions are only possible when there
is at most one change in sign, width or type-category (``int``, ``address``, ``bytesNN``, etc.).

For example, converting ``int8`` to ``uint16`` is only possible, if you go through ``uint8`` or ``int16``.
Since the choice of the intermediate conversion will have an effect on the result
we wanted to make it explicit:

- ``uint16(int16(int8(-1)))`` results in ``0xffff``, while
- ``uint16(uint8(int8(-1)))`` is ``0xff``.

There are more such changes in relation to payable addresses, literals, enums and contracts. For the full list
of changes, please see the [documentation](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/080-breaking-changes.html).

### General Remarks

Since we usually do not backport bugfixes, it is recommended to upgrade all code to be compatible with Solidity v0.8.0.

> The [solidity-upgrade tool](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/using-the-compiler.html#solidity-upgrade) can help you to semi-automatically upgrade your contracts to breaking language changes. While ``solidity-upgrade`` carries out a large part of the work, your contracts will most likely need further manual adjustments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.8.0 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-12-16'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity 0.8.0](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.0) is a breaking release of the Solidity compiler and language. 

> Some of the new features of this release have been elaborated in the [0.8.x preview release post](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2020/10/28/solidity-0.8.x-preview/). Please herewith consider the preview release binary superseded and do not use it anymore.

Reviewer 2: [Why so formal?](https://memegenerator.net/img/instances/55043458/why-so-formal.jpg)
```suggestion
Some of the new features of this release have been elaborated in the [0.8.x preview release post](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2020/10/28/solidity-0.8.x-preview/). Please consider the preview release binary superseded and do not use it anymore.
```

please see the [documentation](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/080-breaking-changes.html).

The change that will affect most users is that arithmetic operations are now checked by default,
which means that overflow and underflow will cause a revert. This feature can be disabled locally by using an ``unchecked`` block.

The second change that is very visible is that the ABI coder v2 is activated by default. You can
activate the old coder using ``pragma abicoder v1``, or explicitly select v2
using ``pragma abicoder v2`` - which has the same effect as ``pragma experimental ABIEncoderV2`` had.
ABI coder v2 is more complex than v1 but also performs additional checks on the input and supports
a larger set of types than v1.

Furthermore, internal errors like division by zero, assertion failure and others
do not use the invalid opcode anymore, but use ``revert`` with a special error message,
in order to not waste gas in such situations.

Another important change is that we restricted the possibilities of explicit conversions
to avoid ambiguities. All conversions that were possible before are still possible, but

> you might have to perform two conversions to get there - which does not affect the generated code, when the optimizer is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you might have to perform two conversions to get there - which does not affect the generated code, though.
```
@chriseth should we revert this change?

Reviewer 3: ah right!

is at most one change in sign, width or type-category (``int``, ``address``, ``bytesNN``, etc.).

For example, converting ``int8`` to ``uint16`` is only possible, if you go through ``uint8`` or ``int16``.
Since the choice of the intermediate conversion will have an effect on the result
we wanted to make it explicit:

- ``uint16(int16(int8(-1)))`` results in ``0xffff``, while
- ``uint16(uint8(int8(-1)))`` is ``0xff``.

There are more such changes in relation to payable addresses, literals, enums and contracts. For the full list
of changes, please see the [documentation](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/080-breaking-changes.html).

## General Remarks

Since we usually do not backport bugfixes, it is recommended to upgrade all code to be compatible with Solidity v0.8.0.

You can find a guide on how to update your code [here](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/080-breaking-changes.html#how-to-update-your-code).

Note that changes listed below are the **changes between 0.7.6 and 0.8.0**. For changes introduced
during the 0.7.x series, please see the individual changelogs or release announcements on this blog.

## Full Changelog

### Breaking Changes:

> * Assembler: The artificial ASSIGNIMMUTABLE opcode and the corresponding builtin in the "EVM with object access" dialect of Yul take the base offset of the code to modify as additional argument.

Reviewer 4: I would change this in the changelog (and here):
```suggestion
* Yul: The ``assignimmutable` builtin in the "EVM with objects" dialect takes the base offset of the code to modify as an additional argument.
```

Reviewer 3: Oh come on, this is the changelog...

Reviewer 3: I won't change it in the other two places.

>  * Assembler: The artificial ASSIGNIMMUTABLE opcode and the corresponding builtin in the "EVM with object access" dialect of Yul take the base offset of the code to modify as additional argument.
>  * Code Generator: All arithmetic is checked by default. These checks can be disabled using ``unchecked { ... }``.
>  * Code Generator: Cause a panic if a byte array in storage is accessed whose length is encoded incorrectly.

Reviewer 2: These indented bullet points might be a problem for some markdown renderers.
```suggestion
* Assembler: The artificial ASSIGNIMMUTABLE opcode and the corresponding builtin in the "EVM with object access" dialect of Yul take the base offset of the code to modify as additional argument.
* Code Generator: All arithmetic is checked by default. These checks can be disabled using ``unchecked { ... }``.
* Code Generator: Cause a panic if a byte array in storage is accessed whose length is encoded incorrectly.
```

>  * Code Generator: Use ``revert`` with error signature ``Panic(uint256)`` and error codes instead of invalid opcode on failing assertions.

Reviewer 4: There' some indentation change here.

Reviewer 2: Looks like my suggestion was applied but it wasn't complete - I marked only the first 3 lines because the list is long.

Reviewer 3: Will relpace the whole changelog.

 * Type System: Disallow the ``byte`` type. It was an alias to ``bytes1``.
 * Type System: Disallow ``msg.data`` in ``receive()`` function.
 * Type System: Disallow ``type(super)``.
 * Type System: Disallow enums with more than 256 members.
 * Type System: Disallow explicit conversions from negative literals and literals larger than ``type(uint160).max`` to ``address`` type.
 * Type System: Introduce ``address(...).code`` to retrieve the code as ``bytes memory``. The size can be obtained via ``address(...).code.length``, but it will currently always include copying the code.
 * Type System: Explicit conversions between two types are disallowed if it changes more than one of sign, width or kind at the same time.
 * Type System: Explicit conversions from literals to enums are only allowed if the value fits in the enum.
 * Type System: Explicit conversions from literals to integer type is as strict as implicit conversions.
 * Type System: Introduce ``block.chainid`` for retrieving the current chain id.
 * Type System: Support ``address(...).codehash`` to retrieve the codehash of an account.
 * Type System: Unary negation can only be used on signed integers, not on unsigned integers.

>  * View Pure Checker: Mark ``chainid`` as view.

Reviewer 4: This is not sorted.

Reviewer 3: *sigh*.

 * Type System: Explicit conversion to ``address`` type always returns a non-payable ``address`` type. In particular, ``address(u)``, ``address(b)``, ``address(c)`` and ``address(this)`` have the type ``address`` instead of ``address payable`` (Here ``u``, ``b``, and ``c`` are arbitrary variables of type ``uint160``, ``bytes20`` and contract type respectively.)
 * Type System: The global variables ``tx.origin`` and ``msg.sender`` have type ``address`` instead of ``address payable``.
 * Yul: Disallow the use of reserved identifiers, such as EVM instructions, even if they are not available in the given dialect / EVM version.

### Language Features:

>  * Super constructors can now be called using the member notation e.g. ``M.C(123)``.

Reviewer 4: Just wondering, why wasn't this added on 0.7.6 instead? :)

Reviewer 3: It's a breaking change
